Part I The Printing Revolution
We should notice the force, effect, and consequences of inventions, which are nowhere more conspicuous than in those three which were unknown to the ancients; namely, printing, gunpowder, and the compass. For these three have changed the appearance and state of the whole world; first in literature, then in warfare, and lastly in navigation: and innumerable changes have been thence derived, so that no empire, sect, or star, appears to have exercised a greater power and influence on human affairs than these mechanical discoveries.
Francis Bacon, Novum Organum, 1620
1 The Divine Art

My design is to give an historical account of the authors, discovery, improvement and progress of the Art of Printing; an art so highly beneficial to mankind, by preserving and transmitting to posterity the treasures of ancient and modern learning, that its origin has been esteemed divine.
Samuel Palmer, 1733

Figure 1.1 Turning point--The invention of moveable type printing involved a combination of old and new techniques. Johannes Gutenberg, a metalsmith from Mainz, Germany, worked for over 15 years to perfect the process that produced the first Bible in 1454. It was an extraordinary example of craftsmanship, far superior to hand-lettered manuscripts, and it signaled not only the printing revolution, but a turning point in human history. Engraving by Johnson, Fry & Co., 1869, Library of Congress.
1 The Printing Revolution: 1400s to 1814
People were astonished when they saw the first unbound pages of Johannes Gutenberg's Bible at Frankfurt's traditional harvest fair in 1454. There were none of the blemishes, rubricator's marks, or scraped-out ink spots that characterized hand-lettered manuscript Bibles. The linen paper was bright, the edge of the type was crisp, and, at 30 florins, the cost was one-tenth of a manuscript Bible.
"The script was very neat and legible, not at all difficult to follow," wrote an enthusiastic bishop to his supervisor. "Your grace would be able to read it without effort, and indeed, without glasses." He also called Gutenberg a "marvelous man," which is one of the few personal insights we have into the life of Johannes Gensfleisch zur Laden zum Gutenberg (Eisenstein 1980; Fussel 2005).
We know that Gutenberg was born around 1398 in Mainz, Germany, at a time of plague, social chaos, and political upheaval. We think that his father was a cloth merchant and a goldsmith for the Church, and Johannes may well have learned that craft. We have a record of his enrollment at a university around 1418. We know of a will that mentions him in 1419, and there are records of a disputed promise of marriage in 1436. That's about all we know about his early life, except that he ran into problems with an intriguing business in 1439.
Gutenberg's business involved a new way to make the small metal badges that were popular with people who were on religious pilgrimages. The badges, or "pilgrims' mirrors," were four inches high and made from cheap metals such as lead and tin. They would be sewn onto hats or cloaks to show that the traveler was a pilgrim, and they would be held up in the presence of religious relics as the pilgrim's act of devotion. Millions of the badges were sold across Europe between the medieval era and the late Renaissance. Even today, the badges are still being dug up along the old pilgrim trails.
From court records, we know that two investors backed Gutenberg in an improved process for making the metal badges. They expected to sell 32,000 of them, and they were well into production when news came that the Aachen, Germany, pilgrimage was being postponed for a year due to bubonic plague.
With the setback, Gutenberg realized he needed another way to keep investors happy. He started a second enterprise in Strasbourg, France, that used the alloy of lead, tin, and antimony. It also used, according to cryptic court documents, "something required for printing" (McMurtrie 1941). Most likely, then, 1439 is the starting point for what became the first successful printing enterprise. This was the year when Gutenberg first poured metal into a matrix that held the blanks for the different letters of the alphabet. However, like the pilgrims' mirrors, this early enterprise also ended badly. By 1440, one partner was dead from the plague, and one of the important tools--a form for metal casting-- could not be recovered from his house.
Gutenberg continued to experiment with metal type and presses during this time, and may have printed several undated works such as a Latin grammar and an astronomical calendar. After a few years, he returned to Mainz to assemble a printing system that would produce the flawless 1,282-page, 42-line Gutenberg Bible. This complex system included metal forges and molds for type; a way to set the type; a long-lasting ink; a new kind of press; contracts for high quality linen paper; methods to stack and order pages; and financing to pull the system together. Sales of the new Bibles were not slow, but in 1456, just as the printing company began to look like a financial success, Gutenberg's investor Johann Fust (or Faust) foreclosed on the loan and took over the business. Gutenberg probably continued in another small printing operation in Bamberg, Germany, and then worked for the Church in other ways in Mainz. He died in 1468.
Meanwhile, Fust and his son-in-law, and former Gutenberg foreman, Peter Schoffer, began the second wave of the printing revolution with a popular form of religious book called a psalter. They also printed two editions of works by the Roman poet Cicero and a "Letter to the Imperial Estates" describing the issues in a war between two contending bishops in Mainz in 1462. It was one of the first uses of the press to disseminate and comment on the news of the day.
For almost a decade, the printing industry grew slowly and stabilized in central Germany as several dozen people trained in the craft. Then in 1465, two German printers sponsored by a Catholic cardinal started a new printing operation near Rome. By 1469, three other German printing companies had moved to Venice, and by 1471, the number of printing businesses began a dramatic growth. By 1480, every city in Europe had at least one printing company.

Figure 1.2 Johannes Gutenberg--This is the traditional but probably incorrect likeness of the printer from Mainz. The hat and beard would not have been worn by someone from his time and culture. However, no better images exist, according to the Gutenberg Museum in Mainz, Germany. Engraving from John Luther


1.1 Precursors of the printing revolution
Gutenberg's system of printing text with moveable type was new in 1454, but the process of making an impression with ink on a raised surface was ancient. The earliest known printed images are from "cylinder seals" used in early Mesopotamian civilizations from around 3500 BCE. Made from hard stone, glass, or ceramic materials, they were rolled across wet clay or textiles to create repeating patterns. Engraved seals and stamps continued to be used for thousands of years to print on clay and cloth.
Chinese artists and scribes used woodblock printing for images, and sometimes text, starting from the sixth century CE. In Europe, similar woodblock images were widely used for playing cards and pictures of saints from the 1200s on. Artists who wanted fine detail and longer press runs shifted to metal plates by the 1400s.
Still, the transition from engraving and woodcuts to printing with moveable type was not easy to make. Woodblock printing is not suitable for more than a few thousand impressions, since images and text start to get fuzzy as the edges of the wood break down under the pressure of the press. Engraving plates are one way around the problem, since text can be engraved on a copper or zinc plate, but they are expensive and difficult to correct. When thousands of impressions are needed for individual letters, something stronger and more flexible than wood is required. Chinese scholar Bi Sheng (906-1126 CE) was the first to come up with a solution to the moveable type problem. Between 1041 and 1048 during the Song dynasty, Bi Sheng cut characters onto the top of thin clay squares, and then baked them into hard ceramic tiles. The difficulty was in keeping the surface height of all of the separate tiles exactly even in order to ensure that the ink would be perfectly distributed. Even one millimeter can mean the difference between a good impression and one that is too light to read.
Bi Sheng came up with an ingenious solution: he placed all the tiles on a board with a thick coat of wax, and then heated up the board. When the wax was soft, he pressed the tiles down from the top with a metal plate, making them all even as they receded into the wax. Then he would let the wax cool.
The idea worked, but there was a larger problem: Chinese language is logographic, with many different symbols required. This is no obstacle for handpainted text, but a moveable type system required at least 6,000 tiles. So the complexity of a logographic language made it difficult to sort, set, and use moveable type. On the other hand, the Western Latin and Cyrillic alphabets require only about 150 characters. So even though the hardware problem was solved in China, the larger software problem remained, and it was almost as easy to cut woodblocks as it was to set type with a 6,000-character system.
A similar moveable type system was developed in Korea in 1377 using brass characters and woodblock printing, but, Korean, like Chinese, is logographic. While the process worked, it was not a way to drastically cut the cost of communication (Schramm 1989).
A Dutch printer named Laurence Coster (1370-1440) came close to solving Europe's printing problem. The story is that he was playing blocks on the floor with his children when he had the idea to separate parts of the wooden block. The individual wooden characters could then be replaced when they started to wear down. Coster was apparently in the process of switching to metal characters when he died in 1440 (Sonn 2006).
These are just a few of the many rival claims to the legacy of moveable type printing, and the question is often asked whether Gutenberg is in fact the inventor of the technique. From the records and testimony that we have, it does seem clear that Gutenberg was first to solve the key problem of metal type and assemble all the necessary ingredients to create the printing revolution (Taylor 1907; De Vinne 1878; McGrath 2001).
Even so, the printing revolution did not occur because one lone genius invented a single new technology. Printing emerged because Gutenberg's insight into the key problem of moveable metal type occurred at a moment when all of the right conditions and technologies were in place. These included a surplus of paper and ink, as well as presses for printing, foundries for metalsmithing, and a system for business investments.
Most importantly, it occurred because of the rising need for education among the nobility and merchants of Renaissance Europe starting around the 1200s. The purchasing power of the new readership expanded the market to the point where scribes and illuminators were not keeping up with demand.
The printing revolution took place because of "a complex ensemble of many interrelated changes" in social conditions, said historian Elizabeth Eisenstein. "Gutenberg invented moveable type," said historian John Lienhard. "But, it's no exaggeration to say that Medieval Europe worked for 300 years to invent Gutenberg" (Lienhard 1992).
1.2 Diffusion of printing in Europe
Mainz, Germany, was the birthplace of printing; but Venice, Italy, was its cradle. As the most powerful and cultured city in Europe, Venice naturally attracted half of Europe's printing trade during the High Renaissance. By around 1500, Venice had over sixty-five publishing businesses with 200 presses and thousands of people working in printing, paper making, and type foundries.
Two German printers, John of Speyer and his brother Wendelin, were the first to bring printing to Venice in the late 1460s. They produced at least 800 copies of four books--three Roman classics and a book by St. Augustine--in a sevenmonth period between 1469 and 1470 (Brown 1891). The output of the new printing presses was remarkable for the time; one monk in a monastery might, in that same seven months, have produced only part of one book.
Nicholas Jenson (1420-1480), of Champagne, France, was another printing pioneer in Venice. Jenson's previous job as an engraver at a government coin minting plant in France made him uniquely qualified for the printing trade, since he could design and cut type faces on the metal punches used in type foundries. Jensen had been in Mainz to study under Gutenberg and his successors, and left for Venice in 1468. There he invented "roman" type, which was based on the capital lettering used in Roman architecture, along with a standard lower-case script style developed by monks between 800 and 1200 CE. Roman was more legible than Gutenberg's blackletter (gothic) style, and was quickly adopted as a standard.
Jensen, the Speyers, and other early Venetian printers catered to an elite readership, and they tended to see books as works of art in themselves. They printed the books in small editions on high quality parchment with elaborately illuminated initials at chapter heads and handsomely tooled leather bindings.
Aldus Manutius (1449-1515) changed the high-end business model in the 1490s when he began publishing books for the public at reasonable prices, rather than as works of art for the elite. Between 1494 and 1515, his company produced 157 different books, some with more than 1,000 copies. "While Jenson and his fellows looked upon the press largely as a means for putting out a handsome book [as] a beautiful work of art," said historian Horatio Brown, "Aldus regarded it quite as much as an instrument for the diffusion of scholarship" (Brown 1902).
By 1500, Venice had produced half of the four million first printed books, called "incunabula" (Latin for cradle). But other cities were catching up. By 1500, Paris had seventy-five printing houses and was beginning to surpass Venice, thanks in part to strong royal patronage. By 1533, another 18 million more books were produced by Europe's rapidly expanding publishing industry (Smiles 1867).
Today, only a single plaque on a wall near the Rialto bridge marks the city's once bustling printing center, noting, "From this place spread the new light of civil wisdom." But as Venice declined in power and freedom, the industry moved north to the great printing centers of Amsterdam, Brussels, Frankfurt, Paris, and London.
1.3 Why printing was revolutionary
The rapid diffusion of printing is explained by high demand for books in the Renaissance and their suddenly much lower cost. Printing made books hundreds to thousands of times cheaper to produce. Consider this comparison: a monk or nun could copy one double-sided page of one manuscript per day. But even in the earliest days of printing, a four-person crew of typesetters and printers could print about 1,500 double-sided pages per day.
One specific example comes from Leon Battista Alberti, a noted Renaissance priest, poet, and writer from Florence. Alberti may have understated the case in 1466 when he said that Gutenberg's process involved three men working 100 days to produce 200 Bibles. In contrast, he said, a bookseller in Florence employed forty-five scribes for twenty-two months to copy 200 manuscripts (Richardson 1999). The seventy-fold difference in this one case doesn't quite give an idea of the improvement, since Gutenberg's Bible was huge, and we don't know the size of the manuscripts in Florence.
Modern historian Elizabeth Eisenstein gives an example that brings us a little close to the awesome power of the new moveable type printing press: in Venice before the advent of printing, a monk might charge one florin for copying the eighty pages of Plato's Dialogues. In 1483, the Ripoli press charged three florins for printing 1,025 copies of the same number of pages. In any event, it's safe to say that printing was usually hundreds and sometimes thousands of times more cost-effective than hand-lettering (see Sidebar 1.2, Monk Power).
Like other media revolutions to come, the printing revolution regrouped people and skills. The older skills included papermaking, ink manufacturing, leather working, bookbinding and book marketing; and the new skills included press work, typesetting, and foundry type casting. Similar regroupings of skills would be seen, for example, in the visual revolution, when portrait painters like Samuel Morse became daguerreotype photographers and telegraphers; in the broadcasting revolution, when theatrical performers and broadcast engineers created radio drama; and in the digital revolution, when journalists and computer hackers created blogs and collaborative civic information systems.
During the transition from copying to printing in the mid- to late 1400s, the low prices of printed books probably alarmed book retailers who had been selling expensive manuscripts to an elite clientele. But then business accelerated, turning retailers into wholesalers, street vendors into bookstore owners, and copiers into publishers.
Printing continued to expand rapidly throughout the world, reaching as far west as Mexico in 1539 and as far east as Russia in 1553. But the impact of printing was only beginning to be felt (Ferreira 2006). "The printing press precipitated 200 years of chaos, moving from a world where the Catholic Church was the organizing political force to the Treaty of Westphalia, where we finally knew what the new unit was--the nation state," said Clay Shirky, a sociologist who has described a close connection between communications revolutions and the collapse of institutions. The digital revolution, considered in Section IV of


2 Printing and the Renaissance
The Renaissance was already well under way before the printing revolution. The new desire for knowledge, literacy, art, and wealth; the new institutions such as banks, academies, and universities; the new spirit of exploration; and the new focus on human rather than religious goals--all of these marked the changes that illuminated the human landscape at the dawn of early modern Europe. These conditions opened the way for moveable type printing. If Gutenberg had not invented it, someone else certainly would have.
What impact did printing, in turn, have on the Renaissance? Some scholars have pointed to the "lag" between the start of the Renaissance and the development of the printing industry as an indication that social construction was more significant than technological determinism in the printing revolution. Others, particularly Marshall McLuhan, have taken a more deterministic view. Both perspectives help us understand the intertwined nature of causes and effects as we study complex historical processes. To a greater or lesser degree, printing was a major element in the Renaissance.
The first goal for early printers was to increase the availability of religious texts, especially the Latin Bible. A second and closely related initial goal was to recover ancient Roman and Greek manuscripts. There was, said Samuel Palmer in his history of printing, "a laudable zeal in searching the libraries for those valuable books, which had lain buried in obscurity, and were become extremely scarce, great numbers being lost in the times of ignorance" (Palmer 1732).
Once the recovery of ancient manuscripts was underway during the "incunabula" before 1500, contemporary needs could be placed higher on the printers' agenda, and more books could be published in vernacular (native) languages, rather than only in Latin. This especially included the Bible, but also contemporary literature and scientific books. The publishing agenda of French, Dutch, and English printers increasingly emphasized nationalistic and humanistic goals during the expansion of northern printing in the 1500s and 1600s.
2.1 Initial effects of printing
One of the first effects of printing was seen, at the time, as unifying national languages. Books published in French, German, English, and other languages had the effect of codifying and standardizing far-flung dialects. This, in turn, would become a cornerstone of national identity.
A good example is the first book printed in England--Geoffrey Chaucer's Canterbury Tales. The first English printer, William Caxton (c. 1415-92), had moved his printing press from Brussels to a site near Westminster Abbey in 1476. Unlike printers in Venice, Caxton was not as interested in recovering ancient Greek and Roman texts as he was in bringing English authors to an English language market. English at this time, like most languages, had extraordinary variations between regional dialects. Caxton illustrated this with a story about a group of English merchants aboard a ship who sent a boat to a Thames River village to buy some eggs. They asked for "eggys," but the merchant said she did not speak French. Another one of the company understood the local dialect and asked for some "eyren," as eggs were then known in eastern England. "What sholde a man in thyse dayes now wryte," Caxton asked. "egges or eyren? Certaynly it is harde to playse euery man by cause [because] of dyuersite [diversity] and chaunge of langage" (British Library 2015). Later books, especially the Great Bible of 1539 and the King James Bible of 1611, also standardized the language and had a culturally unifying effect.
Standardization of information was another effect of printing; since it allowed exact reproduction of information in a way that manuscript copying did not. This is evident in the contrast between the travel logs of Marco Polo and those of Christopher Columbus. After his return from China in 1295, a century and a half before printing, Polo's narrative was copied in about 150 different manuscripts, with so many differences that we're not sure which version is authentic. In contrast, there is only one version of Christopher Columbus's letters about the exploration of the Caribbean in the 1490s, since they were fixed in printed form and widely distributed at the time they were written. So the certainty of accuracy was another way that printing was an improvement over the old oral-manuscript culture.
Printing itself became standardized in the early 1500s, making possible a new kind of non-linear access to information through title pages and tables of contents and page-numbering systems. Other improvements included better type fonts such as roman and italic, and a standardized printing production process codified in books like Joseph Moxon's Handy Works (1683) or Pierre Fournier's Manuel Typographique (1764).
Major social impacts of printing included the spread of humanism and individualism. New ideas and explorations about human topics included conservative theologian Sebastian Brant's Ship of Fools (1494), a satire about human behavior, illustrated by engraver Albrech Drurer; and In Praise of Folly by Desiderius Erasmus, published 1511. Both were veiled attacks on the social and religious structure in Europe. These and other books began to undermine the hold of religion on culture in the years just before the Protestant Reformation. Printing also boosted the Renaissance sense of individualism and achievement by elevating individuals through biography and authorship. For instance, Erasmus was probably the first modern writer to become famous in his lifetime, thanks to printing. And the ranks of Italian Renaissance artists would hardly be known without the 250 biographies in Giorgio Vasari's encyclopedic Lives of the Most Eminent Painters, Sculptors & Architects, first published in 1550.

Figure 1.6: Letter from Columbus--When Christopher Columbus wrote about his explorations, the information spread rapidly across Europe thanks to printing. This woodcut accompanied a translation of the letter that was printed in Florence, Italy, in October of 1493. Library of Congress.
With standardization and individualism came the possibility of personal comparisons: old ideas could be contrasted, contradictions could be revealed, and new ideas could be presented. Perhaps the notion that a culture could change and reach for new horizons remains the deepest impact of the printing revolution.
3 Printing and the Protestant Reformation
It is hardly surprising that the Bible was the first book Gutenberg printed. Scripture was at the center of the medieval world, and during mass, priests and bishops would read manuscripts of the Latin Gospels aloud, and then use the sermon to interpret the readings in a liturgical fusion of oral and manuscript culture.
The Church initially welcomed printing as a divine gift. Gutenberg's Latin Bible was seen as a way to diffuse knowledge of scripture, and printing was also seen as a practical aid to the Church. For example, printed posters were helpful in recruiting soldiers to fight against invading Turks in the 1450s, and printing accelerated the Church's ability to trade cash for the forgiveness of sins--a practice known as selling indulgences. Where once the practice was limited to what could be written by hand, the printing press allowed thousands of indulgences to be issued whenever a church ran short of cash.

Figure 1.7 Left him hanging--This 1525 woodcut by Lucas van Leyden (c. 1494-1533) depicts a legend about the Roman poet Virgil. The poet fell in love with the emperor's daughter who pretended to reciprocate. She promised to spend the night with him, and in order to evade her guards, she lowered a basket so he could reach her bedroom. But halfway up, she left him dangling, to be mocked the next morning by the citizens of Rome. The engraving tells us that even wise men can be foolish, and more generally, illustrates the new interest in secular and humanistic thinking ushered in by the printing revolution. Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam.
"There is considerable irony about the enthusiastic reception [first] accorded printing by the church," said historian Elizabeth Eisenstein. "Heralded on all sides as a 'peaceful art,' Gutenberg's invention probably contributed more to destroying Christian accord and inflaming religious warfare than any of the socalled arts of war ever did" (Eisenstein 1980).
This "destruction of Christian accord" began to occur when the Church reacted with alarm to translations of the Bible into vernacular (national) languages such as German, French, and English. Although many of these translations had already occurred before printing, they were not accessible to most people. John Wycliffe translated the Bible into English in the 1390s; Jan Huss helped translate the Bible into Czech in the early 1400s; and a variety of German translations, some created by the Church for missionary purposes, were in existence before printing. But none of these challenged the Church monopoly on knowledge since they were in manuscript form, with only a few copies in existence. Printing changed everything.
3.1 Martin Luther and printing
On the morning of October 31, 1517, a devoted priest and doctor of Bible studies, Martin Luther, wrote a letter to the Bishop of Mainz, and, the story goes, nailed a copy to the doors of a cathedral in Wittenberg, Germany. There was nothing terribly dramatic about the act itself--everybody posted notices by nailing them to doors--but Luther's 95 Theses shocked Europe and kicked off the Protestant Reformation.
Luther's point was that sales of indulgences were gross violations of the original idea of confession and penance. "The people are deceived by that indiscriminate and high-sounding promise of release," he wrote in one of the Theses. You couldn't just sin and pay, he said. You had to truly repent.
If his call for reform simply been shouted from the pulpits, or copied by hand, it could have been easily ignored or suppressed. Similar calls for reform from John Wycliffe of London and Jan Hus of Prague had been put down a century beforehand. But the new printing press amplified Luther's voice to an extent that astonished everyone--including Luther.

Figure 1.8 Printing sparks Reformation--Martin Luther's calls for Church reforms were not the first in Europe, but they were amplified by the new power of the printing press. Luther was depicted around 1525 in this portrait by Lucas Cranach. Library of Congress.
The 95 Theses were printed by his friends in January 1519 and widely distributed (Brecht 1985-93). They were in such demand that crowds surged around printing shops, grabbing for pages still wet from the press (Smiles 1867). The controversy spread quickly. Within a few weeks, everyone in Europe knew about Luther's sharp criticism of the Church. For the first time in history, the power of a revolutionary idea was fully amplified by a mass medium.
In considering Luther's success, it's important to note that technology wasn't the only factor. British Museum director Neil MacGregor points out that, at the time, Germany was divided into regional powers rather than a national government. "You couldn't really have a Reformation in England or in France, because the central power was strong enough to kill it, or at least, make it much harder," MacGregor said. "It happens easily in Germany because of the political diversity" (Attar 2014). While the Catholics from southern German states hunted for Luther, powerful rulers in the northern German states kept him in hiding. He used the time to translate the Bible into German and see it printed--an act that codified and regularized the German language and help provide a stronger foundation for the culture. Luther described printing as "God's highest and extremest act of grace," and his followers began to see the printing press as an agent of freedom, delivering them from bondage to the Roman Church and delivering the light of true religion to Germany.
A decade after the Lutheran revolt started, the Reformation was well underway across Europe, and Protestant leaders took full advantage of the press. In Switzerland and France, John Calvin "played a significant role in the evolution of languages considered appropriate for theological writings," said historian Jean-Francois Gilmont (2005). In the process, Switzerland became something of the European capital of Protestantism, and Calvin's Reformed Church was the source of English Puritanism, Scottish Presbyterianism, and French Huguenot Protestantism.
In England, political power see-sawed between Protestants and Catholics in the early to mid-1500s, and each side used the press. Early in his reign, Henry VIII first suppressed Lutherans and the vernacular Bible translations, but then in 1533, broke away from the Roman Catholic Church and established a separate Church of England. He ordered the printing of an English language Bible, known as the "Great Bible" of 1539. It was based primarily on a translation by William Tyndale that had earlier been suppressed. Tyndale didn't live to see what was essentially his translation in print; he was captured by Catholics in Brussels and executed in 1536. Before he died, he said that he hoped he had opened King Henry's eyes.

Figure 1.9 Execution of William Tyndale--British scholar William Tyndale was executed for heresy in 1536 after printing his unauthorized translation of the Bible from Hebrew and Greek into English.
Subsequent English editions of the Bible, including Henry VIII's 1539 Great Bible and the King James Bible of 1611, are primarily based on Tyndale's translations. From Foxe's Book of Martyrs, 1563. Library of Congress.
The English throne returned to a Catholic monarch in 1553 when Henry VIII's daughter "Bloody" Mary took the throne and ordered hundreds of executions. Around that time, British Catholic cardinal Reginald Pole expressed the spirit of the Counter-Reformation when he warned Londoners against reading scripture for themselves: "You should not be your owne masters," he said. "Household religion [is] a seed bed of sedition."
When Catholic Queen Mary died in 1558, her half-sister Protestant Queen Elizabeth I took the throne with a promise of religious tolerance. Protestants solidified power with the publication of John Foxe's Book of Martyrs a few years later. A shocking piece of Protestant propaganda, Foxe's book depicted the gruesome executions of William Tyndale and many others, bolstering Protestant claims to legitimacy.
3.2 The Counter-Reformation
The gravity of the spreading chaos eventually became clear to Roman Catholic Church officials who fought back with a ruthless Counter-Reformation. As a result, religious warfare broke out across Europe and the fighting continued for generations. In Germany, 25 to 40 percent of the population, already halfdecimated by the plague, would perish in religious warfare between 1524 and 1648.
Ordinary people fared badly during the Counter-Reformation. Historian Carlo Ginzburg described the trial of one outspoken Italian miller named Menocchio who in 1584 was accused of heresy for openly expressing simple doubts about a few of the fine points of religious dogma. After an extensive public trial, Menocchio was executed (Ginzburg 1992). Millions of such cases emerged on both sides of the widening chasm between the Catholic and Protestant churches. Sometimes people were executed just for owning the wrong version of the Bible. Giordano Bruno, a philosopher who said the earth revoked around the sun, was burned at the stake in 1600. A more famous scientist who was persecuted for the same thing during this era was Galileo Galilei (1564-1642), an Italian mathematician whose astronomical observations convinced him of the truth of the heliocentric theory. Between 1612 and 1632 he skirted dangerous confrontation with Church authorities, but was finally forced to recant his views publicly under threat of torture.
Meanwhile, Protestant reformers in Switzerland, Germany, and England dogmatically referred to "sola scriptura" as the only authority and then often insisted that they were the only ones who could interpret that scripture. All too often "the rich and varied communal religious experiences of the Middle Ages" were lost as the new authorities demanded obedience. "Open books, in some instances, led to closed minds," Eisenstein observed. The dissidents even suppressed other dissidents. The Church of England attempted to suppress Puritan and Scottish Presbyterian dissent well into the mid-1600s, sparking the "Bishops War" in Scotland and encouraging Puritan emigration to the new colonies in North America. In the end, political pragmatism and a sense of exhaustion helped to deflate religious zealotry in Europe. By the early 1600s, French Catholic Cardinal Richelieu formed pragmatic political alliances with Protestants in order to fight enemies who were Catholic. Religious warfare simmered down after the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648, where the major powers of Europe agreed that each king would determine the religion of his own nation.
But then more religious warfare emerged in France in 1685, forcing French Huguenots (Protestants) to flee the country.

Figure 1.10 Bibles in a barrel--This Ljubljana Castle exhibit shows Slovenian Bibles hidden in barrels. They were smuggled from a printing press in Wittenberg, Germany, in 1584 to Ljubljana to avoid Church authorities who violently opposed the printing of non-Latin Bibles. Primoz Trubar, the Bible's translator, is a national hero in Slovenia, as is Martin Luther in Germany and William Tyndale in Britain. Photo by Lin Burton.
Religion continued to be an important element in conflicts that continued to plague Europe in the late twentieth century, for example, in Ireland and the Balkans. As Elizabeth Eisenstein said:
We still seem to be experiencing the contradictory effects of a process which fanned the flames of religious zeal and bigotry while fostering a new concern for ecumenical concord and toleration, which fixed linguistic and national divisions more permanently while creating a cosmopolitan Commonwealth of
Learning and extending communications networks which have encompassed the entire world. (Eisenstein 1980)
3.3 The slow emergence of religious tolerance
Although printing helped plunge Europe into centuries of religious warfare, it also amplified calls for tolerance and reason. As the horror of religious warfare receded, the need for religious tolerance became a primary ideal among Enlightenment writers.
In France, Sebastian Castellio (1515-63) became one of the first proponents of freedom of conscience. "It is unchristian to use arms against those who have been expelled from the Church, and to deny them rights common to all mankind," he wrote in "Whether heretics should be persecuted," a response to the intolerance of Protestant reformer John Calvin.
In England, John Foxe strengthened Protestantism with his Book of Martyrs, noted above, but he also "enunciated a sweeping doctrine of tolerance even towards Catholics, whose doctrines he detested with every fibre of his being" (Dickens 1978).
A British poet famed for writing Paradise Lost, John Milton (1608-74) matched the idea of religious tolerance to the historical touchstone of the Athenian senate and marketplace, arguing for a "marketplace of ideas" in his 1644 Areopagitica:
And though all the winds of doctrine were let loose to play on the earth, so Truth be in the field, we do injuriously by licensing and prohibiting misdoubt her strength. Let her and Falsehood grapple; who ever knew Truth put to the worse in a free and open encounter?
Milton insisted that Truth would win out in a free and fair fight, although his argument for freedom of conscience was limited: it did not include "popery" (Catholicism), blasphemy, or impiety.
The North American Protestant colonies of Virginia, Massachusetts, and New York avoided religious war, but were notoriously intolerant of religious deviance in the early years. Yet at the surprisingly early date of 1649, the Catholic colony of Maryland made religious toleration the official position.

Figure 1.11 John Milton--English poet and scholar John Milton argued for tolerance and free speech, insisting that truth would win in the marketplace of ideas. Painting by Pieter Van der Plaas, Library of Congress.
Although Maryland's official tolerance only applied to Christians, and was something of a pragmatic approach for a minority religion in a mostly Protestant set of English colonies, the act is still considered a leap forward for human rights:
Whereas the inforceing of the conscience in matters of Religion hath frequently fallen out to be of dangerous Consequence in those commonwealthes where it hath been practised ... Be it Therefore ... enacted ... That noe person or persons whatsoever within this Province ... shall from henceforth bee any waies troubled, Molested or discountenanced for, or in respect of, his or her religion nor in the free exercise thereof ... nor any way compelled to the beliefe or exercise of any other Religion against his or her consent ...
Tolerance was a large part of the new creed of printing, and it was within this cultural ferment that the Renaissance gave way to the Enlightenment. "From the days of Castellio to those of Voltaire, the printing industry was the principal natural ally of libertarian, heterodox and ecumenical philosophers," Eisenstein said (Eisenstein 1980). Printers naturally wanted to expand markets, but the capitalistic motive was not the central point. All Europe was on the move, and
"the enterprising publisher was the natural enemy of narrow minds."

Figure 1.12 Think for yourselves--... And let others enjoy the privilege. That was the advice of FrancoisMarie Arouet (1694-1778), known as Voltaire, one of the most colorful and insightful of the French Enlightenment philosophers. Portrait by Nicolas de Largilliere, c. 1725, Wikimedia Commons.
In France, for example, Francois Voltaire (1694-1788) railed against "the dreadful folly of religious wars." And Voltaire's friend, Benjamin Franklin, noted that printers themselves could be instruments of tolerance:
Printers are educated in the Belief, that when Men differ in Opinion, both Sides ought equally to have the Advantage of being heard by the Publick; and that when Truth and Error have fair Play, the former is always an overmatch for the latter: Hence they chearfully serve all contending Writers that pay them well, without regarding on which side they are of the Question in Dispute. (Franklin 1731)
In his Notes on the State of Virginia (1787), Thomas Jefferson summed up the Enlightenment view of religious warfare: "Millions of innocent men, women and children ... have been burnt, tortured, fined, imprisoned; yet we have not advanced one inch towards uniformity. What has been the effect of [religious] coercion? To make half the world fools, and the other half hypocrites."

Figure 1.13 Printer and scientist--Benjamin Franklin said that printers had a duty to ensure that all sides be heard in the marketplace of ideas. Painting by Charles Nicholas Cochin, c. 1777, Library of Congress.
